# Generating a design system

A design system is the primary resource that a designer will produce using Theme Builder.  It represents the collection of decisions that the designer will make that will help achieve the vision for the look and feel of the application.  Each decision that is made will result in a variety of CSS variables being updated and persisted in order to capture the decision.  The rest of this document will discuss design systems in more detail.

A design system in Theme Builder has humble beginnings.  When a new design system is created in Theme Builder, you, the author, are initially restricted to very few actions.  You must first define a color palette.  This will be the collection of colors from which themes can be defined.  You may decide to define a color for every color that exists in your company's brand or just the subset that will be used by a specific application.  However, at least one color must be present in the color palette before you can progress to the next stage, defining the default theme for the design system.  You may add colors to the color palette in the design system at any time.

Until the default theme is complete, no other parts of the design system will be configurable.  When you construct the default color theme, you will first be asked to identify the primary, secondary and tertiary colors.  For each color you will be allowed to choose from a tray of shades that will be generated from each color available in the color palette.  Once these three colors are defined, you will be free to draw upon these colors and their shades to define which will be used for various aspects of the default theme (such as background colors, button colors and icon colors).  Your last step here is to indicate that you are satisfied with the default theme.  You may want to save your design system at this point to serve as a foundation from which to populate future design systems or as a safe restore point from which to begin again.

Upon establishing the default theme, Theme Builder will now allow you to modify any aspect of the design system that you wish.  To begin, we lightly suggest that you define values at the atom level initially and progress next to the molecules.  As you grow more satisfied with the style that you are achieving, feel free to progress to more complex combinations like organisms.  You may notice that some colors you select, for example in State Settings, will not be used by Theme Builder.  It may choose to use similar, though slightly different, colors.  This is by design.  In order to meet the requirements set out in the accessibility guidelines, some colors cannot be used in combination with others as contrast ratios limits have to be observed.  Similarly, you may find yourself unable to change some settings.  For example, you may not be given the ability to choose to not underline hotlinks.  Again, to be compliant with the standards, hotlinks must be easily differentiated from surrounding text.  Based on the background and hotlink colors that you selected, this differentiation may only be achievable by underlining the text.

So how can you evaluate your new design system?  One thing that you may notice as you use Theme Builder is that the tool itself uses many of the CSS variables that are being affected by your choices.  Button shapes and colors, border shades and elevations and many other visual cues in its user interface will change to reflect the values you selected.  This allows you to be immersed in the design and feel it for yourself.  Theme Builder also provides tabs like **Preview** and **Components** which collect many of the most popular atoms and molecules together to form more complex components and views where the styling that you have been composing can be exhibited in very tangible ways.

As they say, "the proof of the pudding is in the eating".  So once you feel good about your design system, you'll want to try it out in your own environment.  The design system can be expressed as CSS or JSON which can be imported into other design tools like Figma or into component libraries or even directly into applications.  By selecting the **Code** tab, you will be able to select from a variety of different representations of your design system, depending on which work best for your environment.